Let's open to the context of our day's text, Matthew chapter 26, verse 31, is where we can begin.
And the words originally uttered here in our day's text were a response to Jesus' serious
statement about the fulfillment of inspired prophecy, namely, all of you will be stumbled in
connection with me on this night. For it is written, I will strike the shepherd and the sheep of
the flock will be scattered about. But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into
Galilee. But Peter, in response, uttered the words of today's text, which essentially amounted to
excuse me, Jesus, I take exception to that. You're totally wrong about your assessment of my
integrity under pressure. Now, of course, I can understand why you might say that about James and
John, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew, James, the son of Alfias and Thedias, Simon,
the Canony, and even my dear brother, Andrew. But as far as I'm concerned, you're totally wrong in
your assessment of my response to pressure. Well, we love Peter for his unmitigated affirmation of
loyalty, but he did throw all of his brothers under the horse-drawn cart in order to elevate himself.
And what was at the root of that? It's a snare that any one of us could fall into.
In days past, we used to refer to it as the snare of self-confidence. That's the wording
that was used in a subheading, appearing in the Watchtower of January 1, 1998. And in that article,
reference was made to Psalm 85 and verse 8. Let's turn there and notice how it reads,
in our 2013 edition, it says, I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says for he will speak
peace to his people, to his loyal ones, but let them not return to over-confidence. If you're using
the JW Library app and you tap the 8, you'll notice that the reference Bible or the preceding
edition uses the expression, let them not return to self-confidence. And a similar update can be
noted in the text of Proverbs chapter 14, verse 16, which reads, the wise one is cautious and turns
away from evil, but the stupid one is reckless and over-confident. However, this used to read,
the stupid one is becoming furious and self-confident. So really, we get the understanding in the 2013
edition that the problem is not actually self-confidence of itself, but over-confidence or excessive
confidence in oneself, boastful self-confidence. Really, over the years, many times our publications,
even particularly awake, have drawn attention to the need for a measure of self-confidence,
articles on how fathers can actually build this quality in their children, how those who are
overcoming ailments can regain a measure of self-confidence. So it's not self-confidence that's
wrong, but over-confidence. First Corinthians chapter 10, verse 12 puts it this way, in fact,
let's turn there together and notice the context, first Corinthians chapter 10. And Paul recalls the
history of the ancient nation of Israel for the benefit of his readers in verses 6 through 11,
and then verse 12 says, so let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.
Now is the scripture saying, don't even try to stand, don't stand, don't think you're standing.
Well, no, how could that be? For Paul later wrote even in the same letter to the Corinthians,
first Corinthians chapter 16, verse 13, stay awake, stand firm in the faith. Carry on as
men grow mighty. Or in his follow-up letter, second Corinthians chapter 1 verse 24, he wrote,
it is by your faith that you are standing. So we should try to stand, stand, and even think we're
standing. Otherwise, why would Paul tell the Corinthians it's by your faith that you are standing
if he didn't really want them to think that they were standing. The imperative word in first
Corinthians chapter 10 verse 12 is beware. Once we become confident of our standing, we have to be
aware. Remember why we are standing. Remember how we are standing. And remember what boastful
self-assurance, such as Peter manifested in our day's text, can actually do to our standing.
What can it do to our standing? Well, if we begin to grow in self-confidence to the extent that we
lose sight of its dangers, we're vulnerable. We can actually veer dangerously close to
hazards to our spirituality, like what? Well, it depends on our weakness. Satan knows what those are.
In the context, 1 Corinthians chapter 10 verses 6 through 11, the dangers listed are sexual
immorality, idolatry, murmuring, putting Jehovah to the test. We may know the seriousness of these
things, or we may at least know that these are wrong, but if we don't appreciate the danger of
self-confidence, excessive self-confidence, we might think I'm no longer at risk, allow ourselves
to be exposed to situations where enticemen overwhelms our reason, exposure. I have to be so careful
to what we expose ourselves to on the internet, even if we think we're strong. A television can
expose us to the lives of people who have no faith in Jehovah. Quite recently, researchers discovered
that whereas mice typically react instantly to the very scent of cats, mice that are deliberately
exposed at a very early age to the strong scent of cats are much less likely to be alarmed by their
presence and much less likely to flee deliberate exposure at first, induces overconfidence later.
Well, happily most mice aren't subject to the experimentation by scientists, but the point is,
we can't let down our guard to Satan's world. Once we detect its odor, we have to understand the
danger and flee. We may feel safe in our relationship with Jehovah confident in our standing encouraged by
evidence of his help, but we continue trusting in Jehovah's power and not in our own intelligence
or strength. Moses, Solomon, David, the Apostle Peter fell into sin. Why should we ever feel that we
are not vulnerable? And there's so many ways in which overconfidence might ensnare us these days,
but the encouraging thing is what it states in our text comments. Peter is an excellent example
of one who accepted Jehovah's help to overcome boastful self-assurance and Peter succeeded.
And so can we.